.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bashrun.1
.\"
.TH BASHRUN 1 "2010-05-22" "Linux" "User manuals"
.SH NAME
\fBbashrun\fP \- X11 application launcher based on bash
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBbashrun\fP [\fIoption\fP] [\fIcommand\fP] [\fIargs\fP] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBbashrun\fP is an application launcher for X11. It runs an interactive bash
session in a small terminal window, providing all the common bash
features like readline line editing, aliases, tab completion and
history, while adding more features like bookmarks, regexp based
handlers, dictionary lookups and google search queries.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB-d\fP,\ \fB--debug\fP
Enable debugging on startup
.IP \fB-h\fP,\ \fB--help\fP
Show usage information
.IP \fB-m\fP,\ \fB--mode\fP\ \fImode\fP
Select mode to launch or control. In the absence
of this option, the default mode \fIbashrun\fP is used.
.IP \fB-v\fP,\ \fB--version\fP
Show version information
.SH COMMANDS 
If no instance is currently running in the mode specified with
\fB--mode\fP, then an instance is launched in the requested mode and
the command is applied to the newly launched instance, unless the
command is either \fBexit\fP, \fBwid\fP or \fBpid\fP. If no command is
specified, the command defaults to \fBshow\fP.
.IP \fBshow\fP
Show the terminal window. Maps the window, moves it to the
current desktop, moves it above other windows and focuses it.
.IP \fBhide\fP
Unmap the terminal window.
.IP \fBtoggle\fP
If the window is not mapped, show it. If the window is
mapped, hide it.
.IP \fBsmart\fP
If the window is not mapped, not on the current desktop,
obscured by other windows or not focused, then show it. If none of
these conditions apply, hide the window.
.IP \fBexit\fP
Terminate instance.
.IP \fBrestart\fP
Restart instance.
.IP \fBdo\fP\ \fIaction\fP\ \fIcommand\fP
Remotely invoke \fIaction\fP with
\fIcommand\fP. If the requested action involves
.BR su (1),
the window is shown before invoking the action to allow password entry.
.IP \fBsu\fP\ \fIcommand\fP
Remotely invoke the \fBsu-run\fP action with \fIcommand\fP. This is
the equivalent to \fBdo\fP \fBsu-run\fP \fIcommand\fP.
.IP \fBwait\fP\ \fIstate\fP
Wait until the instance is in a certain
\fIstate\fP. Possible values are:
.RS
.IP \fBmap\fP
Wait until the window is mapped.
.IP \fBunmap\fP
Wait until the window is unmapped.
.IP \fBready\fP 
Wait until the instance is fully initialized.
.RE
.IP \fBwid\fP
Report the window id of the terminal window.
.IP \fBpid\fP
Report the process id of the bash instance.
.SH INVOCATION
